---
permalink: /2025/01/29/DE
title: Hinweise zur deutschen Sprache [WIP]
subtitle: Eine Anmerkung jedes Mal, wenn mich die deutsche Sprache verwirrte
date: 2025-10-14 21:44:04 +0530
layout: default
keywords: deutsch, notes
categories: personal
published: true
---

Diese Seite ist in Arbeit.

## Deutsch

- _ins_ is short for _in das_, meaning "in this". _zum_ is short for _zu dem_, meaning "to the". So we use the former for "inside something" and the latter for "going somewhere"
- _Mehrfamilienhaus_: Meaning apartment. From mehr(ere) (“several, multiple”) +‎ Familie (“family”) +‎ -n- +‎ Haus (“house”).
- Michael Schumacher is pronounced as _mika-el schoomahhhuh_ and Sebastian Vettel is pronounced _zebaastyan fetl_. 
- _Ich kann dich nicht hören_: I can't hear you. Even though the word by word translation is more like "I can you not hear"
- _Besichtigen_ $\rightarrow$ touring, _besuchen_ $\rightarrow$ visiting, _suchen_ $\rightarrow$ seeing
- _Warum hörst du nicht gern Podcasts?_: Why don't you like listening to Podcasts?. vs. the word by word translation "Why listen you no like Podcasts"
- _lebensbaum_: tree of life. Different from _lebensraum_: living space and a Nazi talking point.
- Unicode for German characters:
    - `U+00df`: ß
    - `U+00e4`: ä 
    - `U+00f6`: ö
    - `U+00fc`: ü
    - `U+00c4`: Ä
    - `U+00d6`: Ö
    - `U+00dc`: Ü
- _Sag Bescheid_ means "let me know", but the etymology of _Bescheid_ shows us that it means "to inform", so all variations of this phrase generally involve a formal passing of information.
- Difference between _kein_ and _nicht_:
    - _kein_ is used where you need to have an article for a noun. For example, in English we say, "that is not a problem", but the German translation combines the article 'a' to make, _"Das ist kein Problem"_. Other examples are _"Ich brauche keine Hilfe"_, where 'any' is combined into 'not'; and _"Du hast keine Zeit"_ where the 'any' is actually a verbal ellipsis in English.
    - On the other hand, _nicht_ is used when you want to say a direct 'no' or 'not'. This is a far simpler negation, and therefore could be tempting to use everywhere. _Aber das ist nicht immer richtig._

---
